Good day I'm Norman Wildberger l we're looking
at the deep structure of the rational numbers
and last time I introduced the stern broco
tree going back to the mid 19th century this
is it right here and it's an interesting way of
exhibiting the rational numbers that are positive
that are strictly positive the things that we
usually call fractions so in this tree which
actually keeps on going down and down further
and further rows below every fraction appears
exactly once and it does so in reduced form so
7 over 5 appears exactly in this spot in the
infinite binary tree and going from any one spot
to the 2 below it involves taking what we call
the medians operation so to get this one from
this one we actually look at this fraction as
well as the next one to the left above it and
then take the median of these two meaning we
add the numerators and we add the denominators
similarly to get this one from three-halves we
go to the right above it to the next one in the
table that's to the right and take the median of
these two getting 5 over 3 so that is the stern
broco tree today we're gonna have a look at a
variant of it where we replace the fractions
with matrices that's going to be in some sense
simpler even though the matrices are a little
bit more complicated than the fractions because
they allow us to answer the question of how do
you go from an entry to the 2 below it if you
don't know anything above that entry we're also
at the end of the lecture going to talk about
geometrical manifestation of the stern broco
tree a planar representation that leads to a
rather interesting idea of certain very narrow
triangles which were to call wedges gives us
some more insight into this deep sure of their
rational numbers so this is the question that
we're interested in how do we determine the
elements directly below any given entry of the
stern proko tree we can call the two elements
below a given entry maybe it's children and
the answer is we're to look at the matrix form of
the stern broco tree and a good reference for all
this material is the lovely textbook concrete
mathematics by Graham Knuth and Pettis Nick a
lovely textbook on combinatorics and computer
science related mathematics Donald Knuth also
the creator of the mathematical typesetting
language tech so we're going to need just a
little bit of information about matrices so we're
going to look at 2 by 2 matrices and we're only
going to look at matrices with integer values so
called integral matrices and what a matrix is is
an expression of this form some round brackets and
then ABCD for integers ABCD so it's for integers
arranged in a nice little two-by-two array these
matrices are very important in linear algebra and
if you want to find more about them you can have
a look in my linear algebra youtube series while
in alg and here are the operations for addition
and multiplication of two matrices addition is
component wise so to find the top left corner
entry of the sum we just look at these two top
left-hand corner entries and add them the product
of the matrices is a bit more complicated to find
this top left hand corner of the product we don't
just take a 1 times a 2 we take rather the first
row of the left matrix and the first column of the
second Matrix and we multiply them in a suitable
way and what that means is we multiply a
1 times a 2 but we also add B 1 times C 2
that's that entry there this entry here is a 1 B 2
plus B 1 D 2 the first row times the second column
this one is the second row times the first column
so C 1 a 2 Plus D 1 C 2 and this is the second row
times the second column we're only really going to
be using a little bit of matrix multiplication not
very much in this lecture so here is the matrix
form of the stern broco tree it starts at the very
top with this matrix which is a rather special 2x2
matrix it's usually called the identity matrix 1 0
0 1 it has the property that when you multiply any
matrix by that 1 you get the matrix you started
with it doesn't matter whether you multiply it on
the left or the right here are some more matrices
these are also rather important matrices as we'll
see and then the table kind of continues and the
pattern is actually surprisingly simple so to go
from this entry here to the 2 below it what you
do is the following you take the matrix here and
you look at its columns first column in the second
column and to get this entry here what we do is
we add the second column to the first so add the
1 1 to the 2 1 to get 3/2 and leave the second
column where it is and to move right what we
do is something similar we take the first column
and add it to the second column giving us 3/2 and
leaving the first column where it is so another
example starting with here 2 3 1 2 first column 2
1 second column 3 2 to move left we add the second
column to the first column giving us 5 3 & 3 2 to
move right we add the first column to the second
column giving us 5 3 on this side and 2 1 odd the
other side so these outside two columns all the
two children are necessarily the same they're just
a sum of the top two entries and the sum of the
bottom two entries matrix form of the stern broco
tree and here is the official rule for creating
this matrix form we start with the identity matrix
up at the top and below any matrix a b c d we have
the two branches going to this one and to this one
this is the one where we add the second column to
the first column this is the one where we add the
first column to the second column now it's very
convenient to define these two matrices l and r
so they're a lot like the identity matrix except
that L has a 1 in this left sort of corner and
R has a 1 up in the right corner the reason why
it's interesting is because then this branching
operation can be described very efficiently using
matrix multiplication either by L or by R on the
right so if you take this matrix here and you
multiply on the right by the matrix L then you
will get this matrix now when you take this matrix
and multiply on the right by the matrix R then you
will get this one and it does make a difference
whether you multiply on the left or on the right
because matrix multiplication is not commutative
the order does matter so there's a very efficient
way of describing how we create this matrix form
of the stern Broco tree starting with a single
matrix the identity up at the top just go left
and right corresponding to the branches left and
right ok but how do we recover the original Stern
broco tree from this matrix form what we do is we
associate to the matrix ABC the fraction a plus B
over C plus D when we do that we can replace each
of the matrices with a fraction and then we get
exactly the Stern Broco tree that we started with
so for example instead of the identity matrix if
we add the top and the bottom we get 1 over a 1
instead of our we would get 2 over 1 instead
of left or L we get 1 over 2 and this matrix
would correspond to 1 over 3 this 1 to 2 over 3
this 1 to 3 over 2 this 1 to 3 over 1 and so on
now it's interesting to make the observation
that since going left or right corresponds
to multiplying by the matrix L or the matrix R
respectively it means that any element that we
can generate in the tree can be described in terms
of a successive number of matrix multiplications
for example to get this matrix here we start with
this matrix multiplied by R which is just R and
then multiplied by R again to give what we might
call R squared if we wanted to go down here well
we would multiply at this stage this R by L on the
right to get our L this would be L and then this
would be L R and this would be L squared and then
we realize that now what this gives us is a way
of associating to a fraction like three-halves a
sequence of RS and LS or maybe LS and RS depending
which way it starts this is a very interesting
and somewhat surprising benefit that just sort
of drops into our laps by looking at this stern
broco tree that we now have a way of associating
fractions to essentially binary sequences so
every matrix in the stern broco tree is either
the identity matrix up at the top or a product of
L's and ours big is not obtained by either going
left and right starting from the identity matrix
that means that every rational number are bigger
than zero in other words every fraction can be
associated to a unique finite binary sequence
of L's and ours with a special case of r equals 1
associated to the empty sequence which corresponds
to the matrix i so for example the sequence l
ll r l corresponds to the matrix that you get by
starting with the i and going left left left right
left and that turns out to be this matrix here and
in terms of matrix multiplication it's just the
matrix L times the matrix L times the matrix L
times the matrix R times the matrix L it's a
product of these five matrices in the algebra
of matrices two-by-two matrices and then we saw
that this matrix corresponds to the fraction 3
over 11 so this fraction 3 over 11 corresponds
to this sequence and the sequence corresponds
to 3 over 11 another example sort of pulled out
of the Hat RRL lrl which would correspond in the
tree to going right and then right and then going
left and left and then right and then left that's
the matrix 12 7 5 3 you might like to check that
and then that corresponds to the matrix 19 over
8 the most efficient way of checking this is
not by doing the matrix multiplication but
just remembering that the operations corresponding
to either adding the second row to the first row
that's an L operation or adding the first row to
the second row that's the our operation so if you
the identity matrix and you do the RR operation
and then the ll operation that R then L you're
going to get this matrix corresponding to 19
over 8 so we're using the word a finite sequence
here in a rather loose way we haven't completely
clarified what this means in fact it's actually
an important task to think about what exactly we
mean by a sequence it's a very crucial question
in his whole analysis story so the next video we
are going to have a look at that but for now we're
just gonna adopt a little bit of an informal
approach we're just talking about sequences of
L's and r's after all in this case so it's just
a bunch of symbols each of them is either L or R
so I've explained how to go from a sequence of
L's and r's to a rational number are a natural
question is how do you go backwards given the
rational number R how do you recover what the
sequence of L's and ours is that corresponds to it
well that's a fascinating question that opens up a
big chapter of number theory rather elementary
number theory but still pretty interesting
historically interesting number theory called the
theory of continued fractions which goes back to
Euclid and was much studied in the 17th and 18th
centuries so we're going to talk a lot more about
continued fractions a little bit later on this
series you can think of this page here it's just
a little introduction to the ideas just enough
so that you could actually make some computations
yourself so how would we go from 3 / 11 to this
sequence lll RL that we used in the last page so
here's the idea maybe it's a bit like magic if
you've seen it only for the first time 3 / 11
is less than 1 we would like to have something
bigger than 1 so we're gonna take one over its
reciprocal so 3 over 11 is the same as 1 over 11
/ 3 and then we replace eleven over three with
three plus 2/3 because that's a mixed fraction
the same as 3 plus 2 over 3 and now we look at
this 2 over 3 and sort of play the same game with
that replace it with 1 over its reciprocal 3 over
2 and then rewrite the 3 over 2 as 1 plus 1/2
and then finally look at the 1 over 2 and that
2 at the bottom can be written as 1 plus 1 and so
here we have a rather complicated looking fraction
1 over this is all in the denominator 3 plus and
then this thing here is one entity 1 over 1 plus
1 over 1 plus 1 and from this we can extract some
ELLs and ours by looking down these numbers here
and seeing we have 3 corresponding to three L's
and then an R 1 and then 1l how about 19 over 8
well this is already bigger than one so we can
just write it as a mixed fraction 2 plus 3/8 and
bloat will write as 2 plus 1 over 8 over 3 this
8 over 3 can now be re-written as 2 plus 2/3 the
2/3 re-written as 1 over 3 over 2 just like we
did it over here and similarly we'll just get
1 over 1 plus 1/2 and then 1 over 1 plus 1 over
1 plus 1 so now we have a sort of a sequence of
numbers here 2 2 1 and 1 and sure enough there's
two R's and then 2 l's and then 1 R and then 1l so
we're associating two fraction one of these sort
of continued fractions with lots of reciprocals
going down and then reading off these numbers
here we can interpret them in terms of some
sequence of ours and ELLs or elles and ours so
you might like to play around have a look at
that matrix form for the stern bro-code tree make
some calculations associate rational numbers to
matrices two strings of ours & L's and work with
it do some examples go lower down on the tree so
you get some more interesting examples and see
sort of how that correspondence works can happily
spend a few days doing that it's a lot of fun in
linear algebra the theory of matrices is closely
associated with older theory of determinants and
in the two by two case the theory of determinants
is pretty simple although for higher matrices
it's more complicated the determinant of the
2 by 2 matrix ABCD is this number ad minus BC
so this times this minus this times this we've
seen ad minus BC before quite a lot of times when
we're talking about fractions when we also talked
about adjacent fractions you may remember that
two fractions a over B and C over D were adjacent
precisely when this expression was either plus or
minus one so the main theorem about determinants
is this one which actually holds for any square
matrices a and B not just two by two ones but in
the two by two case you can actually check it
yourself the statement is that the determinant
of the product of two matrices is the product of
the determinant of a time's the determinant of
B so you can check this by actually working with
two general matrices a and B and working out the
left hand the right hand sides the significance
of the determinant you should think of it perhaps
in terms of an area if we associate to the matrix
the vectors a B say along the first row and vector
C D along the second row then we can think about
the determinant as representing the area of this
parallelogram that we form it's actually a signed
area because if you interchange the order of the
two vectors then the area changes sign now we
don't have to work with the rows we can also
work with the columns so we could look at the
two vectors AC and BD and the determinant would
also still represent the area of the parallelogram
formed by them the identity matrix has determinant
1 because 1 times 1 minus 0 times 0 is 1 the
matrix L has determinant 1 as does the matrix
R now every matrix in the stern broco tree was
either dead entity matrix up at the top or can
be written as a product of L's and ours and so if
we use this theorem repeatedly any product of L's
and ours is going to have total determinant
1 because each of the matrices l and r have
determinant 1 so for example if you multiply L
times R this rule tells us that the determinant
of L times R is the determinant of L times the
derivative R which will then be 1 times 1 or 1
so that's a property that all the matrices in the
stern Broco tree have and you can check that they
all have determinant equal to 1 so I now want to
introduce a third version of the stern broco tree
this is a geometrical realization of the tree in
the plane more specifically in the positive upper
quadrant of the plane so here we have the x axis
the y axis labeled 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 and so on we
have the various integral lines and the various
points on the plane represented by ordered pairs
a and B and we're interested in a particular
situation here thinking of the origin as a
special point perhaps the Sun so imagine that
you have the Sun right here the Sun is beaming
out rays of light and we're interested in which of
these integral points in this quadrant is visible
from the Sun that is there's a room for a ray
of light to get from the Sun to the point so
this point here three four is visible so if I draw
that line there even though it gets close to some
other integral points it actually misses them so
if some photon could go straight from the Sun to
this point here but the point four four does not
have that property because the ray from the Sun
to four four would first bump into one one and
so this point four four is in the shadow of one
one in fact that's all or all these points here
that's why they don't have dots on them so what
I've shown you here the points that actually have
dots they are the visible points okay and that it
really amounts to that the coordinates a and B
are relatively prime that they have no common
factors what we're gonna do now is we're going
to think about this plane as being another way
of thinking about rational numbers okay so
because we could take one of these visible
points a B which which has the property that a
and B are relatively prime and associate to it
the fraction a over B so to this point here which
has coordinates 5/2 we can associate the rational
number 5 over 2 to this point here which is the
point 7 comma 5 we can associate the rational
number 7 over 5 and so on that has an interesting
advantage okay the interesting advantage is that
now the fraction 1 over 0 which is not really
a fraction it's not really a rational number
it's still represented by a visible point here
because it corresponds to the pair 1 0 there's
the pair 1 0 there that's that point there which
is just as legitimate a point as any other one
we've talked about this representation of
rational numbers actually earlier in this
series and I remind you that we can connect that
with our usual notion of rational numbers in the
following way by thinking of this line here the
line where y equals 1 as being the number line
not this one here this one here so to any point
say 7 5 that one there I can draw the line from
it to the origin and I can draw that line and see
where it meets our number line he would meet it
right about there and that would be a point on the
number line which you would usually call the point
7 over 5 we've just scaled the y-axis coordinate
down so that it's equal to 1 so this is a way of
visually blowing up the rational numbers so
that they're not just sitting on this line
but now they've been kind of expanded into the
plane where we can see them a little bit more
clearly they separate themselves ok so once we've
done that well then we can draw the student broco
tree in this situation now it's sort of starting
from here and going outwards so this is the apex
this is 1 1 or 1 over 1 this is the number 2
over 1 the number 1 over 2 now we can draw a
bond between two points precisely when there's
a bond and the sturb Broco tree between the two
fractions so for example there's a bond between 2
over 3 and 3 over 5 and that's why there's a line
between the point 2 3 and the point 3 5 and every
point here ends up having two children that sort
of in that direction and each one is the child of
a single one other one so this is a third planar
or geometrical form of the stern broco tree which
i think is somewhat novel and reveals yet more
interesting structure of the rational numbers it's
interesting because it has geometrical content now
we can actually talk about the geometry of this
picture not just the combinatorial structure it's
not just a binary tree anymore it's something
with geometrical content so we're introducing
some quite new ideas here and probably later in
the series we'll come back to them and explore
them at a little bit more depth than leisure but
right now I'm on my way to two cutting down real
numbers that's high on the agenda so this is just
a temporary little diversion okay we're looking
now at the stern broco tree and planar form and
I want to connect the matrix form of the stern
broco tree to this geometrical form we gained new
insights by doing that so let's make the following
sort of definitions consider the matrix a CBD and
I purposely change the order of the four numbers
from what I usually do excuse me I write ABCD
now there's an ABCD alright so suppose that's
a matrix in the stern broco tree somewhere I can
associate to that a triangle which is three points
one of the points is a be the first column written
as a point the other point is the second column CD
written as a point and the third is the sum a plus
C over B plus D this third one corresponds to the
fraction which we usually associate with this
matrix in the stern broco tree so for example
if we look at the matrix two five one three
then associated to that are three points one
of them is the point 2 1 the other one is the
point 5 3 and the other one is the point 7 4
so 7/4 is right here 7/4 it up there and two one
is here and five three is here so these are three
visible points these two happen to be connected
by a bond in the stern broco tree telling us that
7/4 is actually the child of five three the direct
child of five three we might call five three the
mother of seven four we might call two one the
father of seven four the father being older or
higher up in the tree the mother has exactly two
children the father has many children but it's
not exactly a sexist situation because all three
roles are shared by any one point so except for
the identity matrix all the other points are both
fathers mothers and children sort of in different
roles you can think about those comments may be
a bit curious all right so what's going on here
what we've done now is to this point seven four it
corresponds to the fraction 7 over 4 and this is
the corresponding matrix for it so the fraction
7 over 4 appearing in the stern broco tree is
associated to the matrix this one here associated
to the same position in the matrix for mr. Brokaw
tree and now to that point or than that fraction
we now associate a triangle this actual triangle
in the plane this kind of triangle is called
a wedge so for every matrix in the stern Braco
tree we get a wedge and it has an interesting
property it has area equals 1/2 this is the
minimal area that a triangle with integral points
in the plane can have so this is in general sort
of a long skinny triangle this one may look long
and skinny but for bigger matrices the triangles
are much longer and much skinnier they become
very hard to visualize so every fraction R has
an Associated wedge W sub R so in this case if
R is equal to 7 over 4 then this triangle is the
triangle W sub 7 over 4 and well so we get lots
of wedges and what sort of interesting is that
we end up getting a tiling of this quadrant the
wedges fit together like a jigsaw puzzle to fill
out pretty well all of the quadrant not quite
all of the quadrant because the non-visible
points are not included it's the visible quadrant
that's that's filled out so for example shadows of
points are not covered and this triangle here is
also a bit of an exception so together with this
red triangle here the wedges W sub R where R is
a fraction tile the visible positive quadrant so
here are some other examples of wedges this wedge
here for example is associated to the point one
half this wedge here associated point two over one
this wedge here associated to point three over one
this one here associated to two thirds this one
here associated to two fifths and I haven't drawn
more but if I do more you see that they fill up
the entire visible positive quadrant and there's
some interesting properties of these things which
I might talk a little bit more about later on in
this in this course it's it's a lovely diagram
but it's maybe not so easy for human beings to
appreciate because the triangles become very
thin very long and skinny very quickly so when
you look at it you see all these really thin
little little wedges and it's not like a usual
tiling kind of picture but nevertheless it's
quite rich mathematically and reveals yet again
the the deep structure of the rational numbers
that's what's being reflected in here next time
we're going to start investigating sequences of
rational numbers moving towards understanding
cozy sequences limits and the various problems
associated with the standard approach to real
numbers I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman WildbergerBerger thanks for listening